Title: Lessons Learned from Blogging for 30 Days
Date: 2016-11-30 19:03
Author: david
Tags: featured
Slug: blog/30-day-blog-challenge-complete
Status: published
url: blog/30-day-blog-challenge-complete
save_as: blog/30-day-blog-challenge-complete/index.html

I did it!

I wrote 30 blog posts in 30 days (including this one).

I'm including this one because I wanted to look back at what I got out
of this little experiment in the hopes that it will be useful to others,
so I intend this post to be a useful edition to my blog rather than some
sort of self-backpatting (not a real word).


# The Positives

Let's start with the positives.

## They turned out OK

I did this little experiment in the spirit of NaNoWriMo, where people
write a 50,000+ word novel in a month.

Now, I know that if I dedicated an entire month to nothing but writing
and managed a 50,000+ word novel, it wouldn't be good. It feels like a
goal so unrealistic that I'd lose the motivation very soon and write
rubbish.

I was worried that this logic would carry over to this project; that
after 30 days I'd be so fed up of writing blog posts that they'd start
turning out terribly.

I'd like to think that there wasn't a visible drop in quality over the
30 days. I mean, I managed to write them all in full sentences, stayed
on-topic, and didn't resort to rambling about random subjects.

## I have 30 more blog posts than I started with

Obviously this was the entire purpose of the exercise, but because I
feel they turned out OK, I have 30 more **usable** blog posts than I
started with.

At my previous pace it would have taken me decades to generate this much
content.

## No time to overthink

Having a daily deadline really got rid of all the distractions and
self-doubt that plagued my blogging efforts before. I had no time to
think about whether a topic was worth discussing - if it was related,
and I felt I could write something useful about it, it was good enough.

"Good enough" is a concept I'm better friends with now.

## Putting yourself out there

I tweeted about every blog post to make sure I was keeping myself
honest. It created a habit that helped me focus on getting the next post
written.


# The Negatives
 
Obviously things weren't all rosy.

## Make it STOP!

This was a **long** month. Having even an hour commitment each evening
was hard work sometimes.

Being an adult is hard.

## Do I even have 30 ideas?

I'm not going to lie, there were some days I struggled to think of what
to write about.

I had maybe 7-8 topics I knew I wanted to write about beforehand, and a
few small machine learning tutorials I wanted to write up, but the other
two thirds of the time the posts were conceived on the day or the day
before.

If I were to do this for another 30 days I might simply run out of
ideas.

## Big topics, small posts

Sometimes I had the opposite problem. I thought of a good topic to
tackle, but due to the time pressure probably didn't do it justice. Or I
responded to a piece of news, such as [the UK's IP bill](/blog/all-your-web-data-are-belong-to-us/),
but would have liked to write a more complete, well-researched view of
it. I actually [did that with the IP bill](/blog/more-on-the-snoopers-charter/).

 
# Conclusion and Advice to Future Bloggers (or past me)

All in all, doing something like this forced me out of my comfort zone.

For a whole month I regularly had to create content and put it out there
without the level of scrutiny and deliberation I normally would have
subjected it to.

I'm now more comfortable with my posts being good *enough* instead of
always aiming for 'perfection'.

I realised I had lots of code snippets, Jupyter notebooks, and
half-finished machine learning tutorials lying around that I never got
around to writing up. Now they're out there.

I actually enjoy writing and, apart from a few days where I wished I
didn't have this task looming over me, I'm glad I've been writing so
much recently.

The momentum is with me, although I will almost certainly stop producing
daily posts (I also have another writing challenge to finish in the near
future, in the form of a Master's thesis). 

So my advice to anyone reading this, including a past version of me,
would be to **[do it](/blog/just-do-stuff/)**!

If you're struggling to add to your blog/portfolio, want a boost to help
you complete half-finished code projects, or you want to get over your
insistence on perfection (I'm looking at you, past me), start a similar
challenge!

It doesn't have to be a whole month, start with less if you want. As
I've alluded to before, starting is almost certainly always the hardest
part.

To get you going, here's some text that you can copy-and-paste into a
tweet to announce your challenge to the world. Fill in the gaps where
appropriate:

> I'm starting a blogging challenge: \_\_\_ posts in \_\_\_ days. My
> first topic will be \_\_\_\_, watch this space!

As silly and patronising as this might appear, the "secret" is to reduce
the barrier to entry, to remove obstacles. I've reduced it now to almost
just Ctrl+C, Ctrl+V. No excuses.

Once that tweet is out there, you'd be surprised at how much focus and
discipline you can muster to make sure you actually complete your
challenge.

Here's to more blogging!

